---
layout: post
title: "Objective Moral Values"
date: 2018-07-18
author: KMB
categories: General
tags: moral-landscape morality ethics
---

Morality is frequently, if not always, associated with subjective connotations in the sense that moral values reside in a purely subjective realm separated from the world of facts and we are therefore unable to discover objective truths about what we should value as humans. Questions of the nature of right and wrong and good and evil have troubled mankind for millennia and it is traditionally considered that these questions have no objective right answers. Moreover, the overwhelming belief is that science has no say when it comes to values because science deals only with facts about the nature of reality and the material world, whereas values are distinct concepts and not ubiquitous. Philosopher David Hume famously said that "we cannot derive an ought from an is". In other words, knowing truths about the world (what is) cannot tell us how we should or ought to behave. This, I think, is an illusion, one that breeds needless difficulties in our public discourse; especially in topics regarding questions of how human societies should organize themselves and under which ethical principles they should operate. The position I'm arguing for is that we can and should construct a robust science of morality. In Hume's way of phrasing it, we should be able to derive moral values purely by knowing facts about the world (deriving an ought from an is). A prominent advocate of this idea is philosopher and author Sam Harris who outlined the arguments and evidence for this position in his PhD thesis that later transformed into a book called the Moral Landscape. Needless to say, I reuse multiple of Harris' arguments here but expand some to further strengthen and defend this position against known objections.

The philosophical foundation of this position is the following: morality is based on the well-being of conscious creatures. First, one should establish where and why moral values arise. It is quite clear that we have no ethical obligations towards inanimate objects because they are unable to have conscious experiences. It is also true that all conscious creatures are not held to the same standards of moral concern and moral accountability. People are not as concerned for insects as they are for dogs or other human beings because insects can't experience such a wide range of emotions, both positive and negative. Thus, morality could be constructed around well-being in a similar manner to which the field of medicine was built on physical health. Upon clearly defining the goal, the landscape clears itself and it becomes evident that there are correct answers to right/wrong questions.

Is it in our best interest, with respect to well-being, to construct a society in which women are the sole property of their men and have essentially no rights? What about a society where racial prejudice motivates its members? Is there anyone who doubts that these questions have right answers and that they are significant? At this point most people agree, however they won't concede that our answers are *objectively* true. In other words, we agree that it is bad, but we cannot say what bad is objectively. To expand on this, what if someone claims that slavery is entirely ethical under certain circumstances and that one cannot assert that they are objectively wrong? The solution to this kind of philosophical counter point is the foundation of morality, i.e., if one accepts the premise that moral values and ethics reduce to concerns of maximizing well-being, then it is quite clear that slavery acts negatively. This strong core principle allows us to effortlessly combat stupid ideas much like we do in other domains of science. For example, what if someone claims that for him/her it is healthy to vomit continuously. Does the field of medicine grant any credence to such an assertion? Obviously not, such claims can be easily dismissed without second thought. It is also worth pointing out that the goal is to maximize well-being collectively and not merely transform the world into a zero-sum game between different groups.

Another concern (and most important, I think) for people is that well-being is not clearly defined or that it's not objective. If you think the latter, feel free to place your hand on a hot stove or lock yourself up for months without human contact and report back. Furthermore, if we can find a person who enjoys pain and emotional distress, etc. does not invalidate the concept of well-being (consult the person who wants to vomit all the time and thinks that it is healthy). Similarly to how the former person doesn't undermine medicine, the latter doesn't undermine well-being. In such cases, it is actually quite likely that there is an underlying neurological problem that results into strange behavior. Regarding the definition of well-being, the analogy with physical health explains it. The standards of physical health have changed just in the past two hundred years. Thousands of years ago, the average lifespan of a human was thirty five; it is now eighty in the developed world. There could come a time, given the advancement of medicine, where a reasonable lifespan would be two centuries. However, the field of medicine is still a real objective science. Therefore, in the way we can differentiate a healthy person from a dying person anytime, we would be also able to evaluate a society's well-being regardless of the era's standards. The morality of Boko Haram or lack thereof versus the Tibetan Buddhists is as obvious as the fact that water is two part hydrogen one part oxygen.

I approach this next point with trepidation because it can be easily misconstrued as a sort of western cultural imperialism. Different cultures and societies around the world have had different interpretations of right and wrong and good and evil throughout time. And it is often claimed that we cannot (generally) compare cultures and assert that one is objectively right and the other is wrong. This sounds to me like utter confusion. Some societies are undeniably fairer, more equal, have advanced human rights and less crime. And all these points are definitely related to well-being. For instance, consider for a moment the way the Taliban in Afghanistan live. We are talking about societies with 7th century ethics that are morally bankrupt. Can't we say the Taliban have it wrong? Are the Taliban the best example of how humans can flourish? No, and given the well-being foundation, we should be able to improve our societies without being trapped by false equivalences of moral values. Moral relativism is this sense is toxic and does nothing but create obstacles. This is not to say that western culture is at the peak of moral success; there are undeniably myriad issues, but the progress already made is substantial with 21st century secular ethics and human rights. We may never know what the best way to live is, but even if we can't know the answer, it doesn't mean it doesn't exist. And there could be multiple equivalent ways to flourish which would maintain some kind of cultural diversity that produces highly moral societies. Just like there is no Muslim algebra or Christian physics, we shouldn't take seriously the Taliban or religious morality based on a vacuous reading of some holy book. 

Here I will address some concerns to the notion that well-being can be objective. Everything a person experiences happens in the brain. Even though neuroscience is still in its infancy, the brain can be studied objectively. The positive and negative experiences of humans can be analyzed too at the level of the brain. Physical (pain) is one aspect and then we have psychological and emotional experiences. These are objectively studied in neuroscience. Morality doesn't exist if there are no conscious creatures and the ways in which conscious creatures suffer physically and emotionally are not subjective; they merely come in various forms. Ergo, if you grant that the worst possible misery for everyone is bad, then morality becomes a navigation problem, i.e., the quest to find ways to maximize flourishing of humans. Even if you disagree philosophically, the practical utility of these observations is too great to be dismissed.

Conclusively, if well-being is the bedrock of morality, there are clearly right and wrong answers to how we should live, what we should value in order to maximize human experiences for the better.
